---
layout:     docs
categories: chapter
---

# Chapter 6

## Conclusion and Recommendations

As a final result, this project delivered the planed basic set of features. Users are already using it and the project has been proven to be fit for purpose.

Although still being in the process of being approved by Apple, the Android version is already live and iOS users have access to the alternative web version.

Despite all that, the list below has been compiled from the feedback heard from users and will be addressed in future iterations:

- Send a welcome email when user registers for the first time
- Create an explanation video to be displayed in the app store
- Display message and disable all functions when user is offline
- Send a push notification when a user is added to list by someone else
- Improve overall look an feel such as adding a back button where relevant
- Make the app more snappy (this may include compile the add along with Crosswalk, a full version of the Chromium browser)
- Improve the web version, the current list and product id being edited should be saved to local storage in case the user presses the browser refresh button.
- have a loading icon when pages are being loaded with an overlay that does not allow users to interact with the application until its' state is ready

In addition, creating a concept of list owners may be a good idea, therefore a list can only be managed by whomever created it, instead of allowing all participants to take this role. In this case, only a list owner can:

  - Delete products
  - Archive/close a list
  - Add support for different languages
  - Remove a user from a list
    - If he/she did not buy anything yet, delete the user
    - Otherwise, have a warning message allowing the delete action to be canceled add state that removing this user will also remove all products he/she has bought

Some extra features could also improve the final product:

- Add different currencies
- Create an invite friends feature
- Add a users guide/help page within the app
- Allow archiving lists, so that a list is never deleted should users want to review it some time in future

In terms of the codebase, due to the small size of this application, files have been grouped based on how Angular qualifies them, that is, if it is a Directive, it goes to the directives file and so on. However, as the application expands, this pattern may no longer be sustainable. Grouping files by feature (Kozlowski and Darwin) will be a better option as the app expands. More specifically, the file that would benefit from this pattern the most is the controllers file. This approach has been demonstrated by several experts in the field, including Pawel Kozlowiski and Sandeep Panda.

Simply as a proof of concept, proving that Ionic and Cordova can produce a hybrid mobile app to all major platforms, it may be a good idea to compile the application for both Blackberry and Windows phone.

Although already mentioned in Chapter 5, implementing automated tests will be paramount in future versions of this app.

Finally, this project demonstrated that it is possible to create hybrid mobile phone apps using web technologies. Although fundamentally similar, mobile development comes with a different set of problems to be solved, most of which are technically challenging. However, completing this project gives me the confidence and enthusiasm to improve it in future and engage in new exciting development endeavours.
