---
layout:     docs
categories: chapter
---

# Chapter 2

## Literature review and Context

Although a good idea, IOU is not alone, in fact, there are several other smartphone applications that allow expense sharing and beyond, in this chapter I aim to rationalise each of the main alternatives and contrast where IOU exceeds and falls short.

The list of IOU phone apps comparison in this chapter is by no means exaustive, neither in number of features nor in the number of applications. It simply names the most popular applications available and analyses their main features.

### Splitwise

#### What is it
A fully featured money spplitting application that allows users to track expenses and even caters for fairness common bill sharing problems such as, to which extent is a girlfriend a housemate and how rent should be split.

#### Where it falls short
Although it integrates with Google+, it has no integration with Facebook, making it a little harder to find your friends and rather difficult to use in different devices, having to remeber which email address and password was used when one first signed up for a service seems slightly out of fashion now.

For some, this may be a plus, but I find it has too many features, making it complicated to get started with, for example, when creating an item, the user has to stipulate how to split it, debts simplification is an option and it does not enforce the usage of groups.

It only tracks what users have spent, not what is due to be bought.

#### Where it exceeds
Other than the points made above, it is really hard to find something wrong with this application, it is available for all major platforms, including a web version, it is very complete, boasts a beautiful interface and is never wrong in when the subject comes to maths accuracy. Most of all, it is free.

If I were to choose an application other than IOU, Splitwise would be my first choice.

### I.O.U - I Owe You

#### What is it
It is a simple application to keep track of IOU notes.

#### Where it falls short
It is only available for Android users and the interface is not particularly pleasant to look at. It does not integrate with social media of any kind operating more as a stand alone application.

#### Where it exceeds
Simplicity, it does what it says in the tin, tracks IOU notes.

### Still Waiting

#### What is it
Yet another IOU reminder application.

#### Where it falls short
It does not integrate with Facebook and the app is not consistent through different platforms, the iOS version being much more superior both in terms of features and interface. The iOS version is not free of charge. Much like 'I.O.U - I Owe You', it is constrained to track IOU notes and not having a 'due to buy queue'.

#### Where it exceeds
It has a pleasant interface and a pragmatic approach towards grouping bills based on people. Has a good set of options and even allows adding pictures and geolocation to your bills.

### IOU - by INEBAS

#### What is it
An application for tracking expenses, bills and IOU notes.

#### Where it falls short
It is only available in the App Store and is not free of charge.

#### Where it exceeds
It has a beautiful and pleasant to use interface. Tracks lending and borrowing money.

## Conclusion
In short, if one is looking for an IOU application, the options are endless, but what sets me into still want to create yet another IOU application is the fact that although all applications mentioned above (even those not mentioned), may do their job quite well, they fall short in the most fundamental issue, they do not solve my problem.

### The problem
All applications tested and tried during the research time for IOU, I found that apps consistenly ignore the workflow of the user and simply focus on a more general approach to bill sharing, if they were to narrow their scope to a smaller niche, then they would be able to become the de facto app for that group.

The main feature that sets IOU apart from the others, is that fact that it allows users to set a desire to buy something, for example, if I am throwing a party, I may set up items to be bought, on a list, as my friends buy them, they mark the items as bought along with how much they spent, or, if I finish the milk at home, I may add it to my housemates list, perhaps another housemate will notice it when strolling around the supermarket before going home. IOU is not only a maths tool, but also, a communication tool that seamesly integrates in the users day-to-day activities.

### How does IOU approach it
The way I envision IOU usage is by being an app that is checked every time one goes to the supermarket or remebers something to be bought for the weekend party or drinks the last bit of milk from the fridge. Once it becomes a habit to use it you no longer need to make groceries lists or ask anyone what is missing for the party or for the house in general.

In addition, IOU's datafeed happens in real time, being always connected via a web socket, this means users do not need to trigger a page refresh, when the data changes, the screen updates automatically.

Finally, having Facebook integration, allows users to simply refer to IOU as an extension of an application they are already using. Making the eco system simple and familiar.

### Some aid literature

- AngularJs from Novice to Ninja, by Sandeep Panda, is the single book that has helped me the most getting started in the world of Angular.js, explaining in a simple and effective way the various components that compose the eco-system.

- Mastering Web Application Development with AngularJS, by Pawel Kozlowski and Peter Bacon Darwin proposes a by feature approach to structuring Angular.js apps, this is gradually becoming the de facto structure for most Angular.js applications.

- Hackers and Painters, by Paul Graham, although not directly related to the work done towards IOU, when feeling overwhelmed by a technology or exhausted to the point of giving up, reading about Paul's experiences at ViaWeb uplifted my motivation and placed me back in the right track.

- Both the Ionic and the Firebase blog have been essential in this journey too.
